Refosco Wine

Refosco (more accurately pluralized as the Refoschi) is an ancient group of closely-related dark-skinned grape varieties. Their origins – which pre-date modern day political borders – include northern Italy's Friuli-Venezia Giulia, western Slovenia and the Istrian Peninsula of Croatia.

Because of their age and geographical spread, the Refoschi have many different sub-varieties and synonyms. A 2005 study combining ampelography and DNA profiling identified six distinct varieties.

Red-stalked Refosco Grapes
Red-stalked Refosco Grapes
Refosco dal Peduncolo Rosso, which translates to "Refosco with the red stems", is widely regarded as the star of the group, with its greatest expressions coming from Friuli's Colli Orientali DOC. The wines here have impressive fruit intensity laced with minerality and tart acidity.

Also in Friuli, the DOC of Carso grows Terrano, which was previously thought to be a synonym for Refosco dal Peduncolo Rosso. However, DNA research has shown that it is actually identical to Refosco d'Istria, and Teran in the Istra region of Croatia. Across the border in Slovenia's Kras region, the Refosk grape variety has the same DNA profile as Terrano. These wines are given very long maceration periods (up to two years) and plenty of time to mature in cask and bottle before being released, resulting in a more opulent style of wine.

Thirdly, Refosco di Faedis is a relatively minor grape, but it has enthusiastic support around the town of Faedis. It is identical to Refoscone, Refosco Nostrano and Refosco di Rochis, and is likely to be a parent of a fourth variety in the group, the near-extinct Refosco di Rauscedo (Refosco Gentile), and a fifth, Refosco del Botton. aka Tazzelenghe ("Tonguecutter"). The sixth of the Refoschini is Refosco di Guarnieri, which is identical to Trevisana Nera, grown in the Veneto.

For some time it was also thought that Mondeuse Noire and Refosco were the same variety. This seems to stem from some old vines of the former, grown in the University of California's Jackson experimental vineyard in Amador County, California being incorrectly labelled as the latter.

In general and across the group, Refosco wines have particularly high acidity and are mostly dark and densely colored with violet and grassy aromas. Flavors of dark peppery spices and plums abound on the palate, and the wine often displays a slightly astringent, almond-skin finish on the palate. Refosco is a late ripener, and if harvested too early, can produce harsh, unripe tannins.